In the last video we learned
how to read ER diagrams.
ER diagrams represent the concepts that
database architects have to implement, but
they don't yet represent how
a database is actually organized.
Although a well designed database will
have an ER diagram that looks very similar
to what the corresponding
database ends up looking like.
To describe the model of what
a database truly looks like,
you use a relational schema.
In this video we will
learn how to interpret and
make these relational schemas.
The critical components of a relational
schema are tables, primary keys and
foreign keys.
To get a feel for how these
components relate to the information
in an ER diagram, let's examine how
one of the ER diagrams we saw in
a previous video would be translated
into a relational schema.
You can see that in general,
each entity in the ER diagram
has been turned into a table
in the relational scheme.
Before I use that word table again though,
I have to tell you that some people would
not approve of using that word when
talking about relational schemas.
Let me explain their disapproval.
Relational schemas can be thought
of as blueprints for database.
A blueprint for a car tells you important
information about how a car is going to be
built, but
it isn't equivalent to a built car.
The reason why is that building
a car takes a lot more work and
draws upon a lot more information
than is included in the blueprint.
Plus the blueprint is a representation of
something that will be made in the future
but the car is a concrete
object that already exists.
Like wise a relational schema tells you
important information about how a database
is going to be organized, but
it isn't equivalent to a built database.
Building the database requires more
work and detailed information than is
represented by the relational schema plus
a relational schema is usually a plan.
But a database is something
that is already made.
If it is important to you to differentiate
between the logical ideas behind
a database design, and
the physical implementation of
those ideas in a database, you will use
different vocabulary for the concepts used
in the database design versus
the steps used in database creation.
This is the reason some people
who get upset at the idea
of describing the box in
a relational schema as a table.
The technical term for the phenomenon
represented by a box in a relational
schemea is relation, which is a term
that once again comes from set theory.
A relation is a logical idea that
serves as the organization for
the physical basis of the database.
For our purposes in this course, it is
not important to emphasize the difference
between the theoretical design of a
database and it's physical implementation.
So I will refer to
the relation as a table.
In general, in fact, I will tell you
what the technical descriptions of
the phenomena depicted in the relational
schema are, but I, like many database
users as opposed to database designers,
will use common names to talk about them.
This will make it much easier for
us to achieve the goals of the course
which is learn SQL not to make databases.
Nonetheless, you should be aware that many
people in the database world feel strongly
that words like table, rows, and
columns are not appropriate for
describing relational schemas.
I'll make sure you know the technical
terminology too in case you need to
communicate with people
who have that view.
With that issue out of the way let's
turn back to what I usually call
tables in relational schemas.
Each table, or
relation in theoretical terms,
has a set of columns which
can also be called fields.
These columns represent the attributes
we saw in the ER diagrams before and
it turns out that they are formally called
attributes in relational schemas as well.
Each entry in a table is a row or
a record.
The formal logical term for an entity and
a table or a relation is a tuple.
In theory,
no Tuple can be duplicated in a relation.
In practice though, rows can be duplicated
in tables, unknowingly for analysts.
And both theory and
practice, the columns in a table are not
allowed to have a particular order.
No matter what it might
look like sometimes,
the rows in a table do not have
a particular order either.
Both columns and rows must be independent
for set theory to work and for
the database to be able to return queries
correctly and as quickly as possible.
As a consequence,
remember that you can never trust
the order in which data are output
from a query unless you specifically tell
the query to output them in a certain way.
The critical thing to look out for
in a relational schema is that each
table must have a primary key.
The primary key for a table will be
one of the columns we talked about
in a previous video that has a unique
identifier for every row in that table.
The primary key will be underlined in
a relational schema just like it was in
the ER diagrams.
The critical difference between the ER
diagrams and a relational schemas,
though, is that although you were supposed
to underline all unique attributes in
the ER diagram, only one unique column
in a table of a relational schema or
database can be labelled as a primary key.
The only exception is if you need
multiple columns to make each row in
a table unique.
The reason you can only have one primary
key, is that the database software
uses the primary key in special
ways to ensure data integrity.
To maintain this integrity,
primary keys are configured so
that they cannot contain
any missing values.
Although missing values can sneak in
occasionally if the database is configured
too flexibly.
In contrast, other unique columns can
be configured to allow for null values.
Despite the null values you can still link
tables using unique columns that are not
primary keys though when
you're on these queries.
To help you with these links it is useful
to mark unique columns in your schema with
a U next to their column titles so
that you know which ones can be use
to link tables in your queries.
The next important concept to know
about is the concept of a foreign key.
Foreign keys are used to
link tables to other tables.
They accomplish this by having values that
refer to unique IDs and other tables.
In our Egger's Reskov example,
contact ID was a foreign key in the Orders
table that let us link each order
with information about the customer
contact in the customer contact table.
You indicate foreign keys in relational
schemas by drawing arrows from the foreign
key in one table to the primary
key it refers to in another table.
It is good practice to write
the abbreviation FK next to the name of
a foreign key column as well, but
some people do leave that out.
It's important to know
that foreign keys and
primary keys to which they match up
do not have to use the same title.
Hopefully a good database designer will
at least make the names seem similar but
you can't rely on that being the case.
So that's one of the reasons
relational schemes can be so
helpful to you as an analyst
trying to query your data.
Now that you know the basic
components of relational schema,
let's look at some additional
examples of relational schemas and
see if we can figure out what they mean.
We'll start with a relatively
straight forward one.
Here, our database is keeping track
of employees and their phone numbers.
Each employee is identified by his or
her own unique employee ID.
Each phone number is unique on its own.
In a query, phone numbers can
be matched up to employees
using the employee ID number
that exists in both tables.
One thing you might notice,
though, is that there's nothing on
the relational schema that says how many
employees can matchup with a phone number.
It's possible that two
employees can live together and
share the same home phone number.
It's also possible that a single
employee could have provided multiple
phone numbers.
This version of the relational schema
doesn't provide that information.
A version that did include this
information we use the same notation as we
learned about in the ER diagrams.
As an example,
here we see that each employee
must have a minimum of one phone number,
but can have multiple phone numbers.
Each phone number must be linked
up to exactly one single employee.
Many relational schemas do not
include giardinelli information.
That's another reason why it's useful
to understand both ER diagrams and
relational schemas.
And why you should ask for both when
you start working with a database.
Let's look at how a weak entity would
be represented in a relational schema.
Here our database is keeping track
of buildings and apartments.
Each apartment is uniquely identified by
a combination of the apartment number in
the apartment table with the building
ID in the building table.
You can discern this from the fact
that both apartment ID and
building ID are underlined in
the apartment table, and that in addition
building ID in this table is a foreign key
to the building ID in the building table.
You might remember this example because
the relational schema we just made
depicts the weak entity we discussed
in this ER diagram in a previous video.
Let's look at one more
example of relational schema.
Here our database is keeping
track of students and classes.
It also has another table called enrolled
in that only has foreign keys as
attributes.
This type of mapping table has to
be implemented when the entities in
the corresponding ER diagram have what
is called a many to many relationship.
In this case each student can
enroll in many classes and
each class can have many
students enrolled in it.
Under these circumstances there
is no way to follow the rule
that primary keys must
not be duplicated and
still included a foreign key in
the same table as the primary key.
Therefore, a mapping table has nothing but
one composite primary keys in it.
The composite key is made up
of two foreign keys that link
to the primary keys of the two tables
of the many-to-many relationship.
Whenever you see a mapping table like this
in a database, it's a clue of the columns
in the tables that links up can have
multiple instances of one another.
I have included some relational scheme
exercises with the course materials
that were once again donated by
professor at Quinlan school of business
at Loyola University, Chicago.
These exercises are derived from
this textbook pictured here.
Like the ER diagram exercises you
are not required to complete these.
But I highly recommend that you do so.
Pay particular attention to
location of the foreign keys.
And think carefully about what
columns you would need to reference
if you wanted to link columns separated
into different tables together.
Since relational schemas are the closest
things you have to map of your database,
learning how to read them comfortably
will make it much easier to navigate your
database with effective queries later.
You should also be aware that you will
often be given access to a database
without a relational schema or any kind of
description of what is in the database.
When this happens it will be useful for
you to know how to generate
a relational schema yourself.
So that you can refer to it when
you start doing your data analysis.
In the next video we will show you
how to make one using ERD Plus,
an online tool that created to
help people design databases.